Minimum Wage: Is it Time for an Increase? 

A commonly argued topic today is whether or not the federal minimum wage should be increased. The Federal Minimum wage refers to the baseline rate companies must pay their employees in exchange for their labor. Currently, the federal minimum wage is set at $7.25. People who argue that the minimum wage should be increased talk about the workers’ lifestyles and how they live in poverty. However, others argue that minimum wage should stay the same because businesses cannot afford to pay their employees more. While there is an argument for both sides, increasing the federal minimum wage slightly as a baseline and varying the minimum wage by the area’s wealth is the best solution.  

In 1938, the Fair Labor Standards Act was passed, which established the federal minimum wage (Goddard, 2022). The minimum wage was created to motivate workers to work harder and to ensure workers will make a livable wage (Goddard, 2022). It also created equal labor standards because of the level it set for wages which helped create equality among workers. After the federal minimum wage creation, many positives arose from the innovation, which is why the minimum wage is still in place today. With more than a decade of stagnation of the minimum wage, people are now arguing that the current minimum wage is not accomplishing the goals it was created to do.  

The first minimum wage was set at $0.25 and hour and had been increasing along with inflation and even gaining in value over time, but the federal minimum wage has not increased from $7.25 since 2009 (Supreme Court Debates, 2021). With the minimum wage decreasing over 13 years, it has lost some value. In 2009, $7.25 had a buying power of $9.13 in today’s world. Now the minimum wage has lost so much value that it no longer accomplishes all of the goals it was created for. As time goes on, the minimum wage will lose more and more value, which is why it is time for an increase.  

The current minimum wage is $7.25 an hour, which makes an annual income of $15,080, putting those who make minimum wage under the poverty line, which is $17,420 for a family of two. With this income, it is tough for people to provide for their families and even themselves. Minimum wage workers are forced to rely on government programs like SNAP to put food on the table for their families (Nguyen, 2018). The minimum wage also severely affects the living conditions of these families. Many of these families cannot afford many of the commonalities that others enjoy, such as a car, entertainment, or even a safe environment, which includes terrible schools, neighborhoods, and low-security areas. Also, once people are in these positions of poverty, it is tough to get out because it is hard for them to find other alternative jobs or housing.  

Physical and mental health is also affected by minimum wages. Working long hours on a job that barely compensates them for their hard work puts a significant toll on those workers’ bodies. Eventually, they will get sick with something or get hurt, and they will not have enough money to get better. They may not go to the doctor, buy medicine, or even take sick days because they need the money. Some companies do not even have sick days or allow workers to take leave if they are unable to work. Workers’ mental health is also severely affected by low wages. Working at dead-end jobs every day and making very little money takes a toll on people’s mental health and can lead people to alcoholism, abusive behaviors, and even suicide (Dixon, 2021). Mental health problems are common for people who work low-wage jobs because they feel like they are worth what their wage is. They work hard every day and get little compensation for it, making them feel less of themselves and gradually changing their behaviors. 

Low wages do not affect the health of just the workers, but the families of the workers as well. Increases in the minimum wage have shown decreases in low infant birthweights, infant mortalities, and overall increased child health (Nguyen, 2018). A study using the data from the National Child Abuse and Neglect data system from 2004 to 2013 showed that an increase of $1 to the minimum wage decreased child neglect by 9.6% (Nguyen, 2018). The minimum wage affects more than just the amount of money a worker makes; it also impacts their health, their family’s health, and their overall quality of life.  

Many jobs that pay minimum wage require a lot of work that requires higher pay. For instance, in the healthcare field, the lower-standing female employees often get paid minimum wage even though they work long and hard hours (Hartz, 2019). Unrealistic minimum wage jobs, such as those in the healthcare field, may affect women more than men because of the unjust wage gap in today’s workforce. On average, if a man and a women work the same exact job, the man will make 30% more than the woman (Dowell, 2022). Female healthcare workers help people in need who are sick or hurt, and these workers cannot even afford health insurance for their own families. Each day is long and strenuous, which should mean that these employees get paid a fair wage, but that is not the case. A minimum wage is what the big health companies believe that these workers deserve after putting their all into their work.   

Studies also show that a $15 minimum wage would get around half of the minimum wage workers in healthcare out of poverty (Leigh, 2019). While a $15 minimum wage may be too high, it gets the point across that a higher minimum wage would help workers out of poverty. The healthcare industry is also a wealthy industry that does not have any excuse for not paying its employees more. Healthcare stock prices are high, which signifies that they are a flourishing industry and that there will always be a need for healthcare, so there is no reason why this industry should not have enough money to increase the minimum wage. Furthermore, on average significant healthcare CEOs pull in 20 million dollars annually, which shows how much these companies are making each year if the CEO is making this amount (Leigh, 2019).  

Another reason the minimum wage should be increased is that it will expand the economy as long as the central bank is willing to tolerate additional inflation. If the U.S. increases the minimum wage, it could increase inflation, but if the central bank tolerates the inflation, it will not have any devastating effects on the economy. A higher inflation rate and a steady nominal rate will decrease the real interest rate, which increases economic activity (Glover, 2021). Inflation is not the worst thing to happen to an economy, and the research done by Glover shows that, in some cases, inflation can be a good thing. As long as inflation is observed and maintained correctly, the economy will expand.  

Putting more money in the hands of the lower class by increasing the minimum wage will also benefit the economy because they will be spending more money on goods and services, which will help companies, which in turn helps the economy. Glover, in his article, What Happens When Minimum Wage Rises? It Depends on Monetary Policy, gives graphs showing how the quantity of products is increased with a higher minimum wage (Glover, 2021). Increasing the minimum wage will motivate workers to do better work and to get more work done, which leads to an increased output of products. Furthermore, a higher wage will increase their motivation to do better work, creating better goods and services and impacting the economy. Increasing the federal minimum wage will impact the economy in many ways, like expanding the economy and propelling the U.S. forward.  

A counterargument to this point is that product prices will also increase if the minimum wage increases. The reason why prices would increase is because inflation would increase due to the higher wages. While this might be an adjustment for many consumers, in the long run, it will not have a significant effect on the economy. Higher prices are already seen in today’s stores. Inflation has increased by 13.9% from January 2021 to October 2022, which is the highest inflation has been in forty years (Benson, Cornith, Nichols, 2022). An inflation rate this high will decrease the value of minimum wage by a significant amount. It will take some time, but the economy will adjust to the increased prices, and they will help the companies that produce those products by increasing their revenue.   

If the minimum wage does not increase soon, the government should expect some backlash from those minimum wage workers. In the past, there have already been strikes against low wages in the U.S. there has even been a strike this year on November 10, which consisted of Starbucks employees around the country going on strike to fight for better wages, consistent scheduling, and higher staffing levels (Durbin, 2022). Even in other countries like Indonesia, workers have gone on many strikes to fight for higher wages (Siregar, 2020). People have the willpower to fight for what they believe in, and when they get denied, they come back harder. Eventually, those strikes will turn into riots and other forms of violent protests, which will be terrible for the U.S. and its economy. To prevent all of this, the U.S. needs to give the workers what they deserve.  

A common argument against raising the minimum wage is that it will result in more unemployment, and many people will lose their jobs. It seems common sense that if businesses are forced to pay employees more, they will not have enough money to pay all of their workers. Part of this statement is true. If the minimum wage is increased by a large amount, like if it were set to $15 an hour, many people would lose their jobs, and unemployment would increase. Companies are all different sizes meaning each company has a different amount of revenue. Some of the large companies can afford to pay their employees $15, but small mom-and-pop shops cannot. For this reason, the minimum wage should be increased, but not by too much, where companies cannot afford it.  

Setting the minimum wage this way can be the best of both worlds. People would be getting paid more, and companies would not have to fire employees because they cannot afford to keep them. Businesses would also not have to worry about going out of business. An example of a minimum wage increased slightly would be if the minimum wage was set at $10 an hour. All businesses would be able to pay that, and employees would be getting paid better for all the work they do. A $10 minimum wage would still allow a competitive work market because it allows companies to pay more than that if they need more employees.   

A way that this new minimum wage could be introduced is by increasing the wage by increments. In an article written by Supreme Court Debates, they talk about how raising the minimum wage by separate increments could help companies with adjusting to paying their employees more (Supreme Court Debates, 2021). In this article, they use six increments as an example and there would be increments once per year for six years. This method could be done for a $10, $12, or $15 minimum wage, and they all would increase by different increments. Along with the baseline for minimum wage, wages should also be different depending on the state and its wealth. Wealthy states like New York and California will have higher wages compared to states like Wisconsin and Nebraska. With this method, it would be easy for companies to adjust to the higher wages while also giving employees the higher pay they deserve.   

Another argument that people have made against raising the minimum wage is that just raising the minimum wage will not make a big difference in the number of people living in poverty. The argument is that people just making a few more dollars an hour will not make a big enough impact to get a lot of people out of poverty. While this may be true and will not get every person out of poverty, but nothing of its own will. Increasing the minimum wage will be a step in the right direction in the fight against poverty, and this first step can lead to other programs that can help people in poverty. Also, even this little increase can make a big difference in some of those workers’ lives that cannot be taken for granted.  

There is no one singular thing that can put an end to poverty on its own, it must be many programs put together that makes a big enough impact. Raising the minimum wage will be an important part of getting people out of poverty and doing that along with creating other programs like helping people find work, help people budget their money, and getting people out of dangerous neighborhoods will all make a big impact. Creating programs like these will not be done in a day, they will be made overtime which is why doing things such as raising minimum wage now will start to effort to end poverty.  

In today’s world, working a full-time or part-time job for $7.25 an hour is not nearly enough money for people to live off of. For this reason, the minimum wage needs to be increased. While it would be ideal to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour, that is not realistic. Many companies would go out of business, and many people would lose their jobs. For this reason, a compromise must be made, which is that a minimum wage of around $10 an hour would be the best fit. Workers would be getting a higher pay, while companies are able to pay this amount. Not all problems minimum wage workers face would be fixed by this increase, but it is a great start and it could change many people’s lives. 
